# Introduction

This essay aims to introduce context for my project. I will give a brief historical background on each artist, explaining how their careers and styles evolved over time. I will then discuss the current state of scholarship within the field of NLP analysis of music, and how my project fits in to this context and contributes something unique.

# Historical background on each artist

My project focuses on five famous songwriters: Taylor Swift, Joni Mitchell, Bob Dylan, Sting, and Stevie Wonder. Each has had a distinctive career and musical evolution spanning decades. If we are to interpret the data we receive from the NLP methods, we must first understand the musical changes they went through during these decades, and the personal and historical events which prompted them.

# Joni Mitchell

Joni Mitchell was born in 1943 in Fort Macleod, Alberta, Canada. Her professional music career began in 1963, when she dropped out of college at age 20 due to an unexpected pregnancy, a baby girl which she put up for adoption; Joni spent her early twenties playing folk music around clubs and coffeehouses in Canada. Joni married Chuck Mitchell in 1965 and divorced two years later. Her first LPs, Song to a Seagull, Clouds, and Ladies of the Canyon, were an expression of her folk roots, focusing on fictional pastoral stories of love and loss set to increasingly layered instrumentals. Blue, critically recognized to be her magnum opus and by far her most confessional work, was a departure from this trend, featuring mostly stripped-down piano ballads. About the writing of Blue, Joni said: "At that period of my life, I had no personal defenses. I felt like a cellophane wrapper on a pack of cigarettes.”<sup>1</sup> The next series of albums she released, from Court and Spark (1974) to Mingus (1979), featured a radical departure from her previous work into increasingly experimental jazz. Joni became lyrically wistful and cynical, particularly on Hejira and Court and Spark; “Shadows and Light” and “Hejira” were abstract musings on existence itself. The other albums during this period were simply much more abstract and wacky than before: “It drummed on the galvanized / In the washroom, women tracked the rain / Up to the makeup mirror / Liquid soap and grass / And Jungle Gardenia crash / On Pine-Sol and beer” (“Paprika Plains,” Don Juan’s Reckless Daughter). Joni had her second marriage in 1982; on the three albums following this marriage, Joni changed directions again, into synthesizer-heavy pop, but retained the unusual lyrical style; none of these albums were particularly well received. It was not until 1994, when Joni’s second marriage ended and she released Turbulent Indigo, that Joni fell back into public interest, receiving two grammy awards for her return to more accessible lyrical themes and guitar-focused songwriting. Soon after, she released Taming the Tiger, written in a softer, more accessible jazz style, and Both Sides Now, a collection of jazz standards and older compositions.

# Taylor Swift

Taylor Swift was born in 1989 in Reading, Pennsylvania; her family moved to Nashville, Tennessee in 2003 to help her pursue a country music career (her demo album from that year is included in my dataset). Swift’s following three studio albums were solidly in the country-pop genre, featuring simple, catchy songs about high school romance (“You Belong With Me,” “Fifteen”), growing up (“Mean”, “Innocent”) and heartbreak (“White Horse”, “Dear John”). With Red (2012), Swift transitioned fully into pop, with hit songs which dropped the themes of innocence and introduced a bit of sassiness (“I Knew You Were Trouble,” “We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together”). 1989 (confusingly released in 2014), perhaps Swift’s most critically well-received album, featured even more emotionally sophisticated songwriting, with a general theme of nostalgia (indicated by its title), and a dark, rebellious edge (particularly notable in the hits “Style,” “Wildest Dreams,” “Blank Space,” and “Bad Blood”). Perhaps noticing the success of this shift, Swift proceeded to make the darkest album of her career, Reputation (2017); while still a major commercial success by any metrics, Reputation did not perform as well as 1989, because listeners were not as keen on the dark, brooding theme as for the more emotionally balanced albums. Probably for this reason, Taylor completely reversed directions with Lover, focused on themes of romance and forgiveness. Her following two albums, released back-to-back in 2020, seemed to strike an emotional middle ground, exploring indie-folk with an ironic, melancholy, and nostalgic tone. Themes on these albums revolved around isolation (likely because of the pandemic) and featured much more sophisticated language (“masquerade revelers,” “the wedding […] was a little gauche”) and pop culture references (“we were like the mall before the internet”) than was precedented in popular music. Her last two albums to date maintained a similar lyrical style, while shifting back to pop-based instrumentals.

# Sting

Sting was born in 1951 and grew up by the shipyards of Wallsend, Northumberland, England. He formed The Police in 1977 with Stewart Copeland (Andy Summers joined soon after): they released five albums before disbanding in 1983. The band’s lyrical content was originally punk-inspired, with 1978’s Outlandos d’Amour featuring simple, angsty songs of heartbreak like “So Lonely” and “Can’t Stand Losing You,” although its smash hit “Roxanne,” written from the perspective of a man enamored with a stripper, showcased a kind of poetic creativity, a hint at what was to come. The following two albums continued in this vein, incorporating more social commentary. Ghost in the Machine (1981) was a departure from the band’s prior style, with Sting’s lyrics exploring the mystical and esoteric in songs like “Spirits in the Material World” and “Secret Journey.” Synchronicity (1983) was the band’s final album, released at the height of their fame when they were dubbed “The Biggest Band in the World.” It doubled down on the mystical and esoteric themes, full of poetic compositions which took full inspiration from Sting’s stint as an English teacher, referencing everything from Greek myths to Bible passages and Jungian psychology; even its smash hit Every Breath You Take, although a lyrically simple love song on the surface, hides a sinister undertone. The Police broke up due to conflicts between the members, and Sting also divorced his first wife at this time. Sting completely changed style when he went solo, working with jazz musicians to create two jazz-pop albums which were just as lyrically complex as their predecessor (Nothing Like The Sun (1981) is a quote from Shakespeare). The former album focused on historical and social events in tracks like “Russians,” “Children’s Crusade,” and “We Work The Black Seam”; the latter showcased Sting’s sensitive side in songs like “Fragile” and “Straight to my Heart.” Sting’s father died in 1987; he wrote The Soul Cages after four years of grappling with this loss, and the lyrics center on the shipyards where Sting grew up, painting a picture of working-class grief, hope, and redemption. Sting’s second marriage took place a year later. Ten Summoner’s Tales (1993), written in a more allegorical style (hence “tales”) was by far Sting’s most successful album in his solo career, both commercially and critically, and was lyrically one of his simplest. Songs like “She’s Too Good For Me” sound like they could have come from The Police’s early days, and ballads (“Shape of My Heart,” “Fields of Gold”) echo the tenderness of Nothing Like the Sun without any of the existentialism or fancy words. Entering the 2000s, Sting’s lyrics became more globally conscious, with Brand New Day (1999) focusing on themes of global rebirth and hope, and featuring a world-beat sound on songs like “Desert Rose.” Sacred Love (2003) continued in this vein with songs like “Send Your Love.” Sting’s next couple albums did not feature much of his own songwriting; they mostly featured poetry, madrigals, and hymns from centuries ago.The musical The Last Ship (2013), like The Soul Cages written two decades prior, was set in the shipyards of Sting’s childhood, focusing on the decline of the shipbuilding industry.

# Stevie Wonder

Stevie Wonder was born in 1951; he grew up in Detroit, Michigan. A child prodigy, Wonder began recording on the Motown label at the age of 11 and was the youngest solo artist ever to release a billboard no. 1 hit (at the age of 13). His albums during the following decade consisted largely of covers of other artists’ music, but with increasing contributions from Stevie through the years. The songs were songs were lyrically simple, with catchy, repetitive hooks (“Signed, Sealed, Delivered,” “Uptight (Everything’s Alright)”). In 1970, Wonder married Syreeta Wright, and they worked together on Stevie’s following album, Where I’m Coming From (1971); this album showed Wonder beginning to incorporate socially conscious songwriting, with the artists wanting to “touch on the social problems of the world.”<sup>2</sup> Wonder began his “Classic Period”: this would be his most productive and commercially/critically successful decade. Wonder was moving away from his Motown roots into a unique fusion of jazz, soul, rock, R&B, and funk. Wonder’s songwriting became more sophisticated, weaving the political and spiritual into more complex storytelling threads (“Living for the City” was a social anthem about the struggle of an urban Black family; “He’s Misstra Know it All” was an indictment of Nixon). All the while, he continued to write simple, accessible love songs (“You Are The Sunshine of my Life,” “Isn’t She Lovely”). The double-album Songs in the Key of Life (1976), widely considered Wonder’s magnum opus (and one of the greatest albums of all time), was the crowning achievement of this classic period, merging a vast array of themes and styles into a cohesive concept album about the power of love, often in spite of social injustice. Wonder did not release more original music (besides a movie soundtrack) until 1980, which began his “commercial period,” featuring mostly synthesizer-heavy pop and occasional no. 1 hits, but no more concept albums. Songs during this period were lyrically simpler, although still occasionally dealt with social themes (“Happy Birthday” helped establish MLK’s birthday as a national holiday). Wonder released a few albums post-1990 which were reminiscent of his classic style, without much success.

# Bob Dylan

Dylan was born in St. Louis County, Minnesota in 1941. Unlike the other artists in my project, Dylan’s lyrics were focused on protest and social commentary from the very beginning. His early albums, Bob Dylan (1962) and The Freewheelin’ Bob Dylan (1963), included civil rights and anti-war anthems (“Blowin’ in the Wind,” “A Hard Rain’s a-Gonna Fall”). His lyrics used a traditional folk-ballad form and direct, simple language to address themes of injustice and human dignity. By 1965, Dylan shifted away from his acoustic folk roots to make electric rock music, and at the same time moved away from overtly political themes. Bringing It All Back Home, Highway 61 Revisited, and Blonde on Blonde feature Bob’s new style of lyric-writing, with a surreal, stream-of-consciousness style; songs like “Subterranean Homesick Blues” and “Like a Rolling Stone” used fragmented, cryptic metaphors to express disillusionment with a rapidly changing society. Dylan suffered a motorcycle accident in 1966 and began a reclusive period in his life, causing musical changes: Dylan moved back to his original, simple folk style, although his lyrics remained non-political. His songs on John Wesley Harding album blended biblical allusions and folk imagery (“All Along the Watchtower,” “The Ballad of Frankie Lee and Judas Priest”). Nashville Skyline (1969) was even simpler and more straightforward, a country-rock album about romance. Dylan’s work in the following years was shaky and received mixed success, and Dylan was estranged from his wife in 1974. This event inspired Blood on the Tracks (1975), widely considered his greatest album. The album is full of poetic, confessional language about the unraveling of a relationship; songs like “Tangled Up in Blue” and “Simple Twist of Fate” use simple language to tell complex, layered stories of heartbreak and regret. Journalist Bill Wyman wrote: “Blood on the Tracks […] seems in hindsight to have achieved a sublime balance between the logorrhea-plagued excesses of his mid-1960s output and the self-consciously simple compositions of his post-accident years.”<sup>3</sup> In the late 1970s, Dylan converted to Evangelical Christianity and released a trilogy of gospel-inspired albums: Slow Train Coming (1979), Saved (1980), and Shot of Love (1981); this change in style and subject matter was generally unwelcome among fans and critics. Dylan began releasing secular music again, although reception remained shaky: Dylan was clearly attempting to find his footing again, experimenting with synthesizer-based pop and returning to social commentary, although critics say his lyrics in this period lacked the depth of his earlier work. Oh Mercy (1989) was hailed as a return to form for Dylan, praised for its lyrical complexity, but was followed by the flop Under The Red Sky (1990) which featured several songs based on nursery rhymes. Dylan’s next original album was Time Out of Mind (1997), one of his most acclaimed, with critic Cook Young saying “Half the songs compare to the introspective plaintive compositions that we witnessed on Blood on the Tracks. The other half are 12-bar blues ditties that often sound as if Bob is making 'em up as he goes.”<sup>4</sup> Love And Theft (2001) and Modern Times (2006) were also critically acclaimed, continuing a trend towards blues and rockabilly music, with liberal citation from older pieces of music and a return to folk imagery.

# Background on NLP for music analysis

A simple Google search will yield plenty of results for NLP projects on music lyrics. This project runs sentiment analysis on the Billboard Hot 100 over the course of decades. This project calculates a few basic metrics for Taylor Swift’s albums, and attempts to train an AI model to write a Swift song. This paper runs sentiment and stylometric analysis on how the Beatles’ music evolved over time, and on differences between Lennon and McCartney. My project differs from its precedents in that it compares several artists’ trajectories over time. Also, my project compares NLP analysis of albums to human analysis of the albums, including the historical context and critical reception — a technique I have not found in the literature.

# Conclusion

The five artists included in my project have had lengthy and varied music careers, making numerous changes in lyrical style throughout their discographies which I hypothesize will be reflected in the data. I will also be looking at how the NLP data relates to commercial and critical success, as well as events taking place in a musician's life at that time. The incorporation of a historical and music-critical timeline into an NLP analysis of musical artists is, as far as I know, unprecedented in the literature.

___

1. Crowe, Cameron (July 26, 1979). "Joni Mitchell" (reprint). Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2024.

2. Davis (2006). Stevie Wonder: Rhythms of Wonder. Pavilion Books. p. 72. ISBN 9781861059659.

3. "Bob Dylan". Salon. May 5, 2001. Retrieved November 10, 2024.

4. Young, Cook. "Review of Time Out of Mind". NY Rock. Archived from the original on November 26, 2010. Retrieved November 10, 2024.
